doc: Merges CLOUDP-274025 docs & examples branch - DONT MERGE YET (#3079)
mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas: docs/guides/advanced-cluster-preview-provider-v2.md

---
page_title: "Migration Guide: Advanced Cluster Preview Provider v2"
---

# Migration Guide: Advanced Cluster Preview Provider v2

**Objective**: This guide explains the changes introduced in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource and how to migrate to it.

>  `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 is implemented using the recommended [Terraform Plugin Framework](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework). This improves the overall user experience and provides a more consistent and predictable behavior. It supports the latest Terraform features and best practices, including the `moved` block between different resource types, for more info see the [Migration Guide: Cluster to Advanced Cluster](cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide#moved-block).

Reviewer: somehow related to previous comment, info --> information?

Author: changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/398f231cb92f65b7694c0a12cfa75e97bc0a9408

Author: updated here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/398f231cb92f65b7694c0a12cfa75e97bc0a9408

}
output "javascript_enabled" {
  value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.advanced_configuration.javascript_enabled
}
```

3. Elements `tags` and `labels` are now `maps` instead of `blocks`. For example,
```terraform
tags {
  key   = "env"
  value = "dev"
}
tags {
  key   = "tag 2"
  value = "val"
}
tags {
  key   = var.tag_key
  value = "another_val"
}

```
goes to:
```terraform
tags = {
  env           = "dev"         # key strings without blanks can be enclosed in quotes but not required
  "tag 2"       = "val"         # enclose key strings with blanks in quotes
  (var.tag_key) = "another_val" # enclose key expressions in brackets so they can be evaluated
}
```

## Best Practices Before Migrating
Before doing any migration create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state).

## How to migrate `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` to Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 

The process to migrate from current `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` to the one in Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 is as follows:
- Before starting, run `terraform plan` to make sure that there are no planned changes.

> - Set environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` in order to use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2. You can also define the environment variable in your local development environment so your tools can use the new format and help you with linting and auto-completion.

Reviewer: I'll leave this comment here even if the answer might be below. I feel we don't have a dedicated section of `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER`. If that's true I'd propose to have one to explicitly explain what it does and that the *sole* consequence of using it is the access to the latest advanced_cluster

Author: We mention the env.var multiple times but it's true there is not a section for it, changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/1808f28040825c6155b28cd62be28d2a986161df

- Run `terraform plan` and you'll see errors as definition file hasn't been updated yet.

> - Apply definition changes explained in previous section until there are no errors and no planned changes. **Important**: Don't apply until plan is empty. If it shows other changes, you will need to keep updating the `mongodb_atlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Apply definition changes explained in previous section until there are no errors and no planned changes. **Important**: Don't apply until plan is empty. If it shows other changes, you will need to keep updating the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original configuration.
```

Author: oops, thanks, changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/c377c9236e2a2904354c79be5093e6e29b41f499

---

> page_title: "Migration Guide: Advanced Cluster (Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2)"

Reviewer 2: This should be our normal "MongoDB Atlas Provider 1.X.0: Upgrade and Information Guide" and explain this release contains a preview feature for the Teraform MongoDB Atlas Provider 2.0.0.  In giving it a different name it will be hard for uses to discover the details of this release, we've had a pattern and breaking that is not great.  Not to mention it's super confusing w/ the other file which is so close. 

Further, let's not use v2. That's normally used to mean a second resource but we aren't using it like that.   It should be 2.0.0 as that's the version that this is a preview for.

Author: changed v2 to 2.0.0 here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/9cdc27dde2d7a131c95e627f89d48ad2313df9db

---

> # Migration Guide: Advanced Cluster Preview Provider v2

Reviewer 3: same as my previous comment, would clarify here if v2 is of the resource/schema/provider?

Author: What wording do you suggest here?

Reviewer 3: We can continue the discussion in the other [thread](https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079#discussion_r1961321712) but at the least may be this can be updated to be consistent with resource docs like `Advanced Cluster (Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2)`

Author: you're right, changed here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/8f229bdcf78c6e94fb7390c465bdff36325b548c

> **Objective**: This guide explains the changes introduced in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource and how to migrate to it.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
**Objective**: This guide explains the changes introduced in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource and how to migrate to it.
```

> **Objective**: This guide explains the changes introduced in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 of `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource and how to migrate to it.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
**Objective**: This guide explains the changes introduced for the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 of the and how to migrate to it.
```

> **Objective**: This guide explains the changes introduced for the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 of the and how to migrate to it.

Reviewer 2: I think putting this info this high up in any file is going to cause heart attacks.  If someone is using a module they can hide these changes on the first go w/ using move.  But we make it sound her like it's always going to be breaking changes.  Then all the module stuff is hidden down in READMEs in examples.  The whole experience and how customers are going to navigate that needs to be in a single file.  It needs to have something like "this is the basic experience we are describing but depending on how you use the provider, directly or in a module, the experience will change.  We have an example of ..." and then link to the examples.  I can't even imagine navigating this right now as a customer.

Author: file deleted and content moved

>  `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 is implemented using the recommended [Terraform Plugin Framework](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework). This improves the overall user experience and provides a more consistent and predictable behavior. It supports the latest Terraform features and best practices, including the `moved` block between different resource types, for more info see the [Migration Guide: Cluster to Advanced Cluster](cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide#moved-block).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
 `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 is implemented using the recommended [Terraform Plugin Framework](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/plugin/framework). This improves the overall user experience and provides a more consistent and predictable behavior. It supports the latest Terraform features and best practices, including support for `moved` block between different resource types, for more info see the [Migration Guide: Cluster to Advanced Cluster](cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide#moved-block).
```

The [resource documentation page](../resources/advanced_cluster%2520%2528preview%2520provider%2520v2%2529) contains all the details about the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource in the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2.

> ## Enable the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`

Reviewer 2: This section should go in docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide.md

Author: file deleted and content moved

In order to enable the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 for `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster`, set the environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true`. This will allow you to use the new `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource. You can also define the environment variable in your local development environment so your tools can use the new format and help you with linting and auto-completion.

> This environment variable only affects the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource and corresponding data sources, it doesn't affect other resources. `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` definition will use the new format and new features like `moved block` from `mongodbatlas_cluster`to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` will be available.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This environment variable only affects the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` resource and corresponding data sources. It doesn't affect other resources. `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` definition will use the new format and new features like `moved block` from `mongodbatlas_cluster` to `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` will be available.
```

> ## Main Changes

Reviewer 2: This should also go in docs/guides/cluster-to-advanced-cluster-migration-guide.md. No reason to repeat it

Reviewer: @themantissa  This section is the "main changes between the existing advanced_cluster and the new TPF one".
I am thinking we can add it to `docs/resources/advanced_cluster (preview provider v2).md` - WDYT?

Author: "main changes" section moved here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/61ed444eec4135c6841a7a66af84d6f694e2ba8c

Author: file deleted and content moved to upgrade guide and resource page: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/74eed136650de7c750c85f86e82bef704831df50

> 1. Elements `replication_specs` and `region_configs` are now list attributes instead of blocks so they they are an array of objects. If there is only one object, it still needs to be in an array. For example,

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
1. Elements `replication_specs` and `region_configs` are now list attributes instead of blocks so they are an array of objects. If there is only one object, it still needs to be in an array. For example,
```

    value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.connection_strings[0].standard
}
output "javascript_enabled" {
  value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.advanced_configuration.0.javascript_enabled
}
```
goes to:
```terraform
output "standard" {
    value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.connection_strings.standard
}
output "javascript_enabled" {
  value = mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster.cluster.advanced_configuration.javascript_enabled
}
```

3. Elements `tags` and `labels` are now `maps` instead of `blocks`. For example,
```terraform
tags {
  key   = "env"
  value = "dev"
}
tags {
  key   = "tag 2"
  value = "val"
}
tags {
  key   = var.tag_key
  value = "another_val"
}

```
goes to:
```terraform
tags = {
  env           = "dev"         # key strings without blanks can be enclosed in quotes but not required
  "tag 2"       = "val"         # enclose key strings with blanks in quotes
  (var.tag_key) = "another_val" # enclose key expressions in brackets so they can be evaluated
}
```

## Best Practices Before Migrating
Before doing any migration create a backup of your [Terraform state file](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/cli/commands/state).

> ## How to migrate `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` to Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 

Reviewer 6: @lantoli Should we mention that once the apply command is run and state is upgraded, reverting to not using the env variable is not supported?

Author: added some info here: https://github.com/mongodb/terraform-provider-mongodbatlas/pull/3079/commits/74eed136650de7c750c85f86e82bef704831df50

The process to migrate from current `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` to the one in Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2 is as follows:
- Before starting, run `terraform plan` to make sure that there are no planned changes.
- Set environment variable `MONGODB_ATLAS_PREVIEW_PROVIDER_V2_ADVANCED_CLUSTER=true` in order to use the Preview for MongoDB Atlas Provider v2.
- Run `terraform plan` and you'll see errors as definition file hasn't been updated yet.

> - Apply definition changes explained in previous section until there are no errors and no planned changes. **Important**: Don't apply until plan is empty. If it shows other changes, you will need to keep updating the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original configuration.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- Apply definition changes explained on this page until there are no errors and no planned changes. **Important**: Don't apply until the plan is empty. If it shows other changes, you must update the `mongodbatlas_advanced_cluster` configuration until it matches the original configuration.
```
